# zettel

® We hold the optimistic belief that ever more detailed molecular analysis will lead to marvellous new cancer therapies. Yet there is clear clinical evidence that existing targeted therapies generally produce mere transient responses that are ultimately defeated by the relentless evolution of cellular adaptations. So we should stop to ask: will better treatments emerge if we apply ever more sophisticated molecular technologies to smaller and smaller populations?

“Understanding the principles governing living communities does not necessarily require — and may even be obscured by — genetics”
In this spirit, I wonder whether genetic data are sufficient, or even necessary, to understand the evolutionary and ecological dynamics of cancer and its therapy. Darwin knew nothing of molecular genetics — his conceptual model of evolution required only an unspecified “mechanism of inheritance”. For nearly 100 years, evolutionary biologists and ecologists observed living systems at various scales and developed the fundamental principles governing complex biological communities with no working knowledge of the underlying genetics. This was possible because the dynamics of both individual organisms and their communities are governed by phenotypic, not genotypic, interactions with environmental selection forces. In other words, understanding the principles governing living communities does not necessarily require — and may even be obscured by — genetics.

The first reports of Covid-19 affecting the central nervous system appeared on the preprint server medRxiv in late February, posted by neurologists in Wuhan, China, where the outbreak started. Analyzing health records from 214 patients admitted to the Union Hospital of Huazhong University of Science and Technology, the team found that 36.4 percent of those patients showed signs of nervous-system-related issues.
The most common symptoms they observed were muscle pain, headaches, dizziness, or confusion—which tend to manifest during any viral infection, especially in older people. A few patients experienced more distinct neurological syndromes, including strokes, prolonged seizure, and a disappearing sense of smell. In at least some of the patients, especially the ones with headaches, the neurological symptoms started days before a cough and fever set in.
The upshot? Doctors need to consider altered brain function as cause to test for SARS-CoV-2, in order to “avoid delayed diagnosis or misdiagnosis and prevention of transmission,” the authors wrote in a peer-reviewed version of the study published Friday in the journal JAMA Neurology. Failure to recognize these early warning signs could result in patients being discharged and unknowingly exposing others to the virus, they wrote.

“We’ve been telling people that the major complications of this new disease are pulmonary, but it appears there are a fair number of neurologic complications that patients and their physicians should be aware of,” says Josephson, who co-authored a commentary about the study that appeared alongside it in JAMA Neurology. Still, it shouldn’t come as a complete surprise that SARS-CoV-2 causes some neurological impairment, he says. Any serious viral infection is likely to affect the central nervous system, either through a direct infection or indirectly through inflammation caused by an immune system response. One of the study’s biggest limitations is that it can’t distinguish between those two possibilities.

That’s in part due to the realities of trying to document a new disease while being buried beneath the first wave of the outbreak. With hospitals in Wuhan overwhelmed by a crush of Covid-19 patients during the first half of February, doctors often had to rely on patients’ own descriptions of their symptoms. There was a lot they couldn’t do, like imaging people’s brains, measuring their nervous system activity, or looking for copies of the coronavirus in their spinal fluid. But that’s the kind of data that would help pinpoint what’s disrupting brain function for some Covid-19 patients.
